# Metabase Reports
The objective of this project is to get information from the API of a [metabase](https://metabase.com/) instance and display it in a formatted report file.

## Setting up your environment

### With [Virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/) (recommended)

#### How to use virtualenv:

* Creating a python environment: 
    * `virtualenv env`
    * env is the name of the folder where your environment will be stored
* Activating your environment:
    * `source ./env/bin/activate`
* Deactivating your environment:
    * `deactivate`
* For more information about how to use Virtualenv visit the [official documentation](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/)


#### Steps to set up your environment using virtualenv:

* Install python 3.X.Y

* Install pip (python3-pip)

* Install virtualenv (``python3 -m pip install virtualenv``)

* Change your current folder to the root directory of the project run in the terminal

* Create your python environment

* Activate your environment

* Install the required python modules: `pip install -r requirements.txt`

* (Optional) Deactivate your environment

* Note: Using this method, you have to make sure you have activated the virtualenv environment before running the metabase reports program

### Without Virtualenv

* Install python 3.X.Y

* Install pip (python3-pip)

* Install virtualenv (``python3 -m pip install virtualenv``)

* Install the required python modules: `pip3 install -r requirements.txt`


## How to Use

* Before running the program the first time you have open the configuration files named **config.json** and **login_info.json** and fill the correct information in the *api_url*, *username* and *password* fields.
* The configuration files are described properly in the Configuration Files section.
* After that, you simply have to execute `python3 ./metabase_reports.py` to run the program.

### Usage

```
usage: metabase_reports.py [-h]
                           [--print_collections | --print_cards [ARGS [ARGS ...]]
                           | --create_pdf_report [ARGS [ARGS ...]]]
                           [-A API_URL]

Metabase Interface program

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  --print_collections   list available metabase collections
  --print_cards [ARGS [ARGS ...]]
                        list metabase cards in specified collection(s)
  --create_pdf_report [ARGS [ARGS ...]]
                        print specified collection(s) or cards to a pdf file
  -A API_URL, --api_url API_URL
                        define api url
```

* The arguments expected by functions in the CLI are the same arguments that may be passed using the **arguments.json** file, as described in the next section.

### Configuration Files

All the configuration files are in the [json](https://www.json.org/) format.

* #### login_info.json

    * The login_info.json file is **required** to use the metabase API.
    * In this file you have to provide a valid *username* and *password* combination for the metabase instance.
    * Example:
```
{
    "username": "username_or_email_here",
    "password": "password_here"
}
```

* #### config.json

    * The config.json file is where the base configuration of the program is stored.
    * The *api_url* is used to specify the api url of a metabase instance.
    * The *api_url* field is **required**, **if** you don't provide a valid api url as an argument in the CLI using the -A option.
    * Example:
```
{
    "api_url": "http://metabase.mydomain.com/api/"
}
```

* #### arguments.json

    * The arguments.json is an *optional* configuration file where the arguments for a function of the program may be passed, instead of passing them as arguments in the CLI.
    * The *print_cards* function expects an array that contains the ids of collections.
    * The *create_pdf_report* function expects an array that contains either the ids of collections or json objects that contains the collection id.
    * In the *create_pdf_report* function you may specify which cards should be used in the report in case you are using the json object as an argument.
    * Example:
```
{
    "print_cards": [3, 2],
    "create_pdf_report": [
        1,
        {"collection": 2, "cards": [5]},
        {"collection": 3}
    ]
}
```

* #### credentials.json

    * The credentials.json file is where the id of your credentials and its expiration date are stored.
    * **Do not edit this file**.
    * Example:
```
{
    "id": "0e9x8afm6pblced4621d373cade4e832627b4f6",
    "expire_date": "2019-04-25"
}
```

* #### graphs.json

    * The graphs.json is the input file where you describe the graphs to be generated by the program using the *generate_graphs* function.
    * The *generate_graphs* function expects one json object per graph to be generated that file and parses the json.
    * Each object should be represented as ``` "Name of the graph" : { ```*attributes*```} ```
    * Example:
```
{
    "Number of types of examples": {
        "type": "pie",
        "labels": "name",
        "values": "count",
        "start_angle": 90,
        "csv_name": "Number of types of examples.csv",
        "csv_path": "/home/user/metabase-reports/csvs/"
    }
}
```

* #### graphs.json *attributes*:
    * #### General:
        * "type": Specifies the type of graph to be generated. String. Required. Accepted values: pie, bar, horizontal_bar, line, vertical_table, horizontal_table;
        * "csv_name": Specifies the name of the source csv file that contains the necessary data to generate the graph. String. Required;
        * "csv_path": Specifies the path where the csv file can be found. String. Required;
        * "description": Short description of the graph that will be shown under the graph name. String. Optional;
        * "parse_date_columns": Date columns in the csv file that should be parsed, automatically or using the *parsed_date_format* attribute. String. Optional;
        * "parsed_date_format": Date format of the date columns after the parsing. String. Optional;
        * "sort_asc": Specifies a csv column to be used to sort the graph ascendingly. String. Optional;
        * "sort_desc": Specifies a csv column to be used to sort the graph descendingly. String. Optional;
        * "primary_color": Color to be used in the graph. String. Optional;
    * #### Pie graph specific:
        * "labels": Csv column of the labels. String. Required;
        * "values": Csv column of the values corresponding to the labels. String. Required;
        * "start_angle": Used to specify the starting angle of the pie graph. Integer. Optional;
        * "dont_show_values": If used, the graph won't show the values corresponding to each percentage. String. Optional;
    * #### Bar and Horizontal Bar graph specific:
        * "x": Csv column of the data to be used in the x axis. String. Required;
        * "y": Csv column of the data to be used in the y axis. String. Required;
        * "x_label": Used to rename the x axis label in the graph. String. Optional;
        * "y_label": Used to rename the y axis label in the graph. String. Optional;
        * "rotation": Used to specify the rotation of the bottom labels. Integer. Optional;
        * "values_rotation": Used to specify the rotation of the value labels. Integer. Optional;
        * "dont_show_values": If used, the graph won't show the values corresponding to each bar. String. Optional;
    * #### Line graph specific:
        * "x": Csv column of the data to be used in the x axis. String. Required;
        * "y": Csv columns of the data to be used in the y axis. More than one column may be specified using the *__,__* (comma) symbol as a separator. String. Required;
        * "y_labels": Used to rename the y axis labels in the graph. More than one label may be specified using the *__,__* (comma) symbol as a separator. String. Optional;
        * "rotation": Used to specify the rotation of the bottom labels. Integer. Optional;
        * "filter": Used to specify a csv column to be used to filter the other columns, when the x axis csv column has duplicate values. String. Optional;
        * "labels_filtered": Used to specify a suffix to each y axis label in the case the csv was filtered. More than one label may be specified using the *__,__* (comma) symbol as a separator. String. Optional;
    * #### Table graph specific:
        * "columns": Csv columns of the data to be displayed in the table. More than one column may be specified using the *__,__* (comma) symbol as a separator. String. Required *(only in the Horizontal version of the table)*;
        * "rows": Csv columns of the data to be displayed in the table. More than one column may be specified using the *__,__* (comma) symbol as a separator. String. Required *(only in the Vertical version of the table)*;
        * "display_header": If used, the table will show name of the headers. String. Optional;
        * "headers": Used to rename the headers in the table. More than one header may be specified using the *__,__* (comma) symbol as a separator. String. Optional;
        * "invert_header_color": If used, the will invert the colors of the table headers. String. Optional;

## Project structure
```
metabase-reports/
├── arguments.json
├── config.json
├── credentials.json
├── graphgenerator
│   ├── graphgenerator.py
│   └── __init__.py
├── graphs.json
├── login_info.json
├── metabaseapi
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── metabaseapi.py
├── metabase_reports.py
├── pdfreport
│   ├── __init__.py
│   └── pdfreport.py
├── README.md
├── requirements-backup.txt
└── requirements.txt

3 directories, 15 files
```
